# Variational Deep Learning
In this lab you will train a variational transcoder with a contrastive loss.

The context for this lab is an ongoing research project in our lab where we are learning
representations of molecules based on bioactivity fingerprints--patterns of binding
across a set of different receptors. The idea is to train a variational transcoder,
a model takes in a chemical graph and finetunes a ChemProp graph neural network. In this lab
we will use pre-computed fingerprints instead of bioactivity fingerprints

         p(Z) <---KL_loss-.
                           \
    GRAPH --ChemPropGNN--> Z --MLP--> FP
      \/                              /
      FP <------recon_loss-----------/

While the KL_loss makes makes the overall distribution so Z to resemble the gaussian prior
for the latent space, molecules with similar fingerprints may not have similar latent
representations. To encourage this, we can use the [TripletMarginLoss](https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.TripletMarginLoss.html) as a *contrastive loss*

    self.triplet_loss_fn = torch.nn.TripletMarginLoss()
    ...
    a_emb, p_emb, n_emb = a_mu, p_mu, n_mu

    t_loss = self.triplet_loss_fn(anchor_embedding, positive_embedding, negative_embedding)

To use this, rather than having a batch consist of a single set of compounds,
each batch consists of three sets, `anchor`, `positive`, and `negative` samples. For each
anchor, positives (similar compounds) can be found using an approximate nearest neighbor lookup
and negatives can be sampled randomly. We'll use [FAISS](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss) for this.


### Learning Objectives

  * Develop a simple VAE architecture to better understand how to build and train them
  * Learn about the contrastive loss architecture and how to sample positive and negative samples
  * Use PyTorch Lightning to organize model and training code

### References

  * Abubakar Abid, James Zou, Contrastive Variational Autoencoder Enhances Salient Features
    (2019) 10.48550/arXiv.1902.04601
  * [PyTorch Lightning](https://lightning.ai/docs/pytorch/stable/)

## Steps
You will want to run this on a computer with a gpu, e.g. the computer cluster, but you can develop
and test locally first.

### 1 Install Packages

You'll want python >= 3.12.

    # framework for developing deep-learning models
    conda install lightning -c conda-forge

    # ChemProp
    conda install chemprop
    # download pre-trained weights
    cd data && curl -LO https://github.com/chemprop/chemprop/raw/refs/heads/main/tests/data/example_model_v2_regression_mol.ckpt

    # install the cpu or gpu version of FAISS for approximate-nearest neighbor lookup
    conda install -c pytorch -c conda-forge faiss-cpu=1.14.1
    conda install -c pytorch -c nvidia -c conda-forge faiss-gpu=1.14.1

### 2 Implement a basic VAE model
Following the example from the lecture, implement `encoder`,
`decoder`, and `VAE` modules, with the following differences

  * For the `encoder`:

    def __init__(...):
      ...
      # initialize the the pre-trained ChemProp GNN model
      # use e.g. https://github.com/chemprop/chemprop/blob/main/tests/data/example_model_v2_regression_mol.ckpt
      self.encoder = chemprop.models.MPNN.load_from_checkpoint(...)
      ...

    def encode(self, batch):
      # extract the ChemProp model encoding as the last hidden layer
      hidden = self.encoder.encoding(batch.bmg, batch.V_d, batch.X_d, i=-1)
      ...

   * For the `decoder`, use a multi-layer percepteron like in lab 08
   * For the `VAE`, implement the `LightningModule` class:

     class VAE(lightning.LightningModule):
       ...
       def forward(self, batch): ...
         return recon, z, mu, logvar

       def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
         ...
         recon, z, mu, logvar = self(batch)
         ...
         self.log_dict(
           {...},
           on_step=True, on_epoch=True, batch_size=bs, prog_bar=False)
         return loss

       def validation_step(self, batch, batch_idx): # similar to training_step
       def test_step(self, batch, batch_idx): # similar to trianing_step

       def configure_optimizer(self):
         optimizer = optim.Adam(self.parameters(), self.learning_rate)
         return optimizer

#### 2 Train the VAE model on compounds from the LSD dataset as in Lab 08
You'll need to initially generate molecular graphs using Chemprop prior to training. 
You can use a similar process as in Lab 8 to generate and collate the datasets,
using molfeat once again to generate fingerprints for our molecules.

Using some of Chemprop's built-in methods, you can generate a MoleculeDataset to
contain all of this information for relatively easy hand-off to the model. This
will change a bit in the Contrastive Loss section.


You can use the following chemprop features:
 `chemprop.models.MPNN.load_from_checkpoint(CKPT_PATH)`
 `chemprop.data.MoleculeDatapoint.from_smi(SMILES, FPRINT)`
 `chemprop.featurizers.SimpleMoleculeMolGraphFeaturizer()`
 `chemprop.data.MoleculeDataset(DATAPOINTS, FEATURIZER)`

For your loss, be sure you're using the correct one based on your chosen
fingerprint from molfeat (BCE vs. MSE).

Be sure to add a logger for Weights and Biases to track the components of your loss!

#### 3 Add contrastive loss
As noted at the beginning, you'll have to create sets containing three molecules
and embed each of them, then use a triplet_loss_fn (like TripletMarginLoss) to
calculate loss for this component.

We'll use FAISS to determine the nearest neighbors of our fingerprints. For each
molecule, use FAISS to find the nearest N neighbors (say 10) and select one of 
them to be the "positive" and then a random other molecule to be the "negative."
Collect them all into a dataset alongside the other components so that the model 
can unpack them and calculate the triplet loss alongside the loss you implemented 
in Step 2.

You will use each molecule as an anchor, and embed all three to get the loss. 
You'll also need to construct separate datasets for training, validation, and test -
don't use FAISS to get neighbors for one set or another!

Be sure to add a logger!


### What to do
  * Train small and medium sized models
  * Generate embeddings of both the transcoder latent representation and contrastive transcoder latent representation
  * Make a UMAP of the embeddings for the input fingerprints and both latent representations.

### Questions
1) Can you think of any applications of a model like this?
2) Take a look at your UMAPs - do you notice any overall changes between the three
representations? Does adding triplet loss cause any changes?
3) Do you expect triplet loss to improve fingerprint reconstruction? Why or why not?
4) How would you pick the dimensionality of the latent space? If you were to add
that to a sweep, what would you look at to determine what dimensionality is good?
5) Besides reconstruction loss, how would you evaluate whether the latent is ‘better’?

### What to turn in
  * The code for the VAE (`model.py`) with and without contrastive loss.
  * The code used to calculate your nearest neighbors (FAISS)
  * A report that includes:
    * Representative loss curves for each of the loss components for both models.
    * UMAPs for each representation.
    * Answers to the five questions above. 
